The individual holding both positions, of
course, is obvious. He has so much unlimited
control.
The tie in between the two experiment stations is
unusual in my mind for the president of the
university.
there's almost an open
playground upon which to switch here and there and
there and here.
As
you may recall, when I became chancellor, one of my
the board said to me, Hubert, we want to build a
strong system.
You build it as strong as you can. It wasn't because
of that reason that I recommended the change to
them of separating out the Experiment Station and
the Extension Service it was mainly because they
were separate budget identities in the
legislature and I didn't and they were as such
I didn't think they should report through the
Chief Executive Officer of another of another
budget entity to get to where they're going too
much opportunity to
to use the money freely and
Very little accountability for the research
programs How is research doing? Are we earning our
money? Is this piece of research producing
something and I know you can't Particularly in
basic research. You can't ask that question. I But
in the applied research field, and much of ours was
applied research, particularly in agriculture,
to some extent in engineering, in applied
research, it's easy to raise the question, how
effective is it doing? Are you fulfilling your
role? Is it quality material?
Those questions weren't being asked. Back in the
rudder williams years can you think of any
opportunities that a m missed are there some
things in hindsight that we could have done yes
very quickly i can come to a big one and that's the
university of texas at arlington
which at one time as you know was a part of the a m
system
I think the relinquishing of that, almost
voluntarily doing it, but in response, I think, to
some protests from the Arlington people that they
did not want to be associated with A&M, no one made
an attempt, to my knowledge, to find out why and to
correct it. I never heard of anything either. In
fact, to my knowledge, nothing was done. Now, I
understood from the far sidelines that some of the
regents were happy to, quote, get rid of it. We can
spend more money then on College Station.
Whatever the cause, it was short-sighted to have
an opportunity to be a part of the Metroplex
system, Dallas-Fort Worth system, Wow. Right.
Great opportunity. Did you ever hear of any,
during your day, of any other institutions in the
state that might have come under the A&M system
umbrella?
I heard talk at one time about Lamar. I can't
remember from which it came. But the talk went
along these lines. It's an engineering-oriented
type institution. We would do well to have it as a
part of this system, and it would give us a
point of light in Southeast Texas. But that was the
only one I recall hearing about. There was, I guess
there was always some talk about the Valley
Schools, but not very explicit, nothing
tangible.
Were there any, as you look back, are there any
academic subject areas that Texas A&M
University, you think, passed by that it might
have added to the program here?
should we have tried to become completely
comprehensive
but i think time will take care of some of that uh...
i think david maxwell's
locating and bringing to this campus The Nautical
Archaeology Group was a great coup. He brought
that thing totally intact and put it in here. I
thought that was a sweeping success. I remember
when, because Winerdi and I were part of that
effort when those people came. Yeah, that was a
great move for A&M. And...
The Fine Arts program, of course, is one of
continuing interest and I think, as I said, time
will help with that.
I recall shortly after I became Dean of Liberal
Arts, I had a visit from two lady citizens of the
College Station community who came to speak to me
supporting
further development in the fine arts.
And I was totally supportive, but at that time I
said, ladies,
at this time, There is such a great pressure upon
the resources of this university
that I think there are other items, other areas
which first must be sought and attained for us. And
I named philosophy, for example, as one of them.
And they agreed to that.
I think the coordinating, well, I think among our
own reviewing
points along the way, fine arts proposals would
have had early on considerable difficulty. And
it's so costly. Huh? So costly for student credit
hours. Yes, yes.
Do you remember some people that we miss some
individuals that got away or that we almost
attracted some key individuals anywhere through
the years.
I remember a few early leavers But they were at
retirement age. I'm thinking here of Clarence
Zener, Horace Bowers. They stayed such a short
time, Haskell. But we didn't lose them to someone
else. Yes. They didn't stay here in the community.
No, no. But I can't remember many people that were
here. and another school hired them away and all of
us said oh look what they accomplished there.
What about looking now with a smile, do you
remember some goofs, some flops, some failures by
somewhere that you witnessed?
I'm sure there are some along the way.
All right, do you remember any proposals that you
made at whatever level that you thought were
important that were turned down?
Oh, gee.
Not here within the university, no. Okay. I can't
think of anything. I tried to, Haskell, I tried to
pick, judiciously pick the things to carry
forward that I thought were winners.
I've had people come to me from departments and
from the faculty seeking this and that and that.
I would I'd say yes that that sounds like an
important opportunity I said but I'm faced with
I'm faced with a budget hearing next week and I
don't want to our next month or whenever and I can't
put that into the mix of things right now
as Dr. Williams became ill, do you remember your
hearing of his illness, his heart attack? In
Houston? Well, the night they flew him down there
from here. I didn't know of that, Haskell. Oh, yes.
Claude Goswick was a young, new doctor at the
health center, and I interviewed a young lady
reporter not so young anymore, for the battalion.
And she said that one of the emergency crew told her
when they got to the president's house that Dr.
Williams' heart wasn't beating. I don't know this
story at all. And then they take him to Houston, and
he has another heart attack. And while DeBakey, do
you remember how you heard about Dr. Williams'
illness? No. I don't recall that. Were you aware
beforehand, as you look back, were you aware that
his strength was declining? No. I certainly
wasn't. No. The interim president was Clyde
Wells, wasn't it? Clyde Wells served as interim
president and chairman of the board. What was
that? What a cushy condition. What was that like
for you key administrators on the campus? I just
ignored it. Okay. Because there were no important
policy matters during that period, were there?
No. All right, then the presidency is separated
from the chancellorship. and the board
identifies a new president, did anybody consult
with you as a dean for suggestion about a new
president? No.
What was the reaction of you and the other deans
when Darvish was announced? Uncertainty
and surprise. And then he selected Mac Prescott as
his vice president. Yes. Did Mac change things
much in his style from Dr. Calhoun? I
think to some extent, yes.
I was surprised that Mack as a vice president was,
and as a scientist, biochemistry.
To me, scientists, when addressed by a problem,
scope it out pretty thoroughly.
aspects of it.
I felt that Mack was more monolithic in his
handling
problems. He would have, I don't want to say
impulsive, but he would have
he would reach a decision and that
decision might be based upon one facet of a
multifaceted situation. And I thought that was
considerably different from Dr. Calhoun's
style.
When Dr. Williams took the job in Houston, A new
chancellor of the system was identified. What can
you share with this machine about that process and
how you were selected?
I really don't
know exactly how my name came before the board.
I suspect to some extent that Bob Cherry
may have at least placed my name, among others,
before the board for consideration. I was also
told by Clyde Wells later on that Dr. Williams had
given him two names in the event something
happened to him. One was John Calhoun, the other
was Frank Hubert.
As
far as you're aware, did they even consider
Calhoun? I don't know. I've never heard, I don't
know.
I think it was a Tuesday morning that they met. I
returned from East
Texas State University where I had been
consulting The day before, got home, oh, 9
or 10 o'clock. Mary Julia said, Frank, Mr. Clyde
Wells has called from the board and invited you to
have breakfast with him tomorrow morning. I said,
fine, okay. I thought, I knew they were in a search,
and I thought they were going to ask me to give them
some advice on search procedures. I had consulted
some with other institutions and with local
school districts on such matters, and I thought
maybe that was the basis for my being invited to
breakfast with them. Well, I went to breakfast.
Nice, congenial
After breakfast, Mr. Wells said, you're aware of
the fact that we're in a search for a new
chancellor, and we'd like to offer you the job.
Just bang like that.
Well, I was really
caught by surprise, Haskell, startled.
I said, I have two questions.
First, have you discussed this with President
Williams? And they said no.
Wait, you said Williams. Huh? You said Williams.
President Miller. President Miller, have you
discussed this with President Miller? And they
said no, rather emphatically.
I next asked if they were aware that I would reach
the age 65 the following summer and would be very
likely retired.
They said, we're aware of that, but it's not a
concern of ours. And I recall Al Davies said, you
can go to 70 as far as I'm concerned. Now, this was
what year? This was 79. This is September of 79,
Haskell.
I said, when would you expect me to start? And they
said, tomorrow. I said, well, I'm scheduled to
leave tomorrow to go to the University of Georgia
and make a speech over a two-day period to a group
there in education. And then I'll return. I said,
what would, I think October the 1st was the
following Monday. I said, how about that? Okay.
So that took place. I went back to the office, told
Peggy, call Mary Julia first,
and that's the way it happened.
It was a strange situation, Haskell, in a way. And
it was truly just completely a bolt out of the blue.
I had no idea, had not ever given it any
consideration whatsoever. And you're implying
made not any effort. No, none at all. None
whatsoever. No phone calls, no third-party
involvement. aloof. I wasn't a part of that.
I
have the impression as an observer as dean of
faculties then that fairly soon there were some
disagreements between you and President Miller
about where the stations and the services
reported.
Is that correct? Absolutely. The board asked me to
bring in a proposed organization plan for the
system.
And I did this on my own, by myself, without
consulting key staff in the chancellor's office,
Freeman or Bond or Cherry or whomever.
I have a background to some extent in graduate
studies in public administration.
I believed then as I believe today. that a separate
budget entity of the state of Texas should not
report to its governing board through another
budget entity.
I'm aware of the fact of the close relationship
between University and Experiment Station. But
I'm also aware of the fact of a total lack of
accountability, in my view, Haskell, of what's
going on in the experiment station. It's all one
happy family, either in engineering or in
agriculture.
That plus the fact that each of these entities
makes its own presentation to the legislature for
its funding as a separate budget entity,
sometimes with support from the president, but
not always, not often.
So for the reason of
direct reporting to your governing board, and the
accountability of your programs.
I felt that the service agencies, if they are to
remain separate budget entities,
should report to their governing board direct. In
other words, through the chancellor's office.
Jarvis and O.D. Butler. O.D., I think, had a pretty
strong influence on Jarvis.
Jarvis and O.D. vehemently opposed.
Don't fix it if it ain't broke.
I gave them my rationale. And I told Jarvis, I said,
I'm going to present this to the board. had it all
mapped out,
and had, I thought, a cohesive coordinating
group, which I called the
Joint Committee on Agency and University
Relationships, the JAGWR.
I, which was comprised of the president of the
university as a presiding officer, the four
directors of the experiment stations and
extension services, the dean of, the vice
president of the university,
a couple of other representatives from the
university, and from the chancellor's office,
Clyde Freeman, and James Bond. I said this and I
laid out the duties of that group there to meet
monthly on matters relating to university agency
relationships in three areas. First, programs.
How shall the agencies support the programs of the
university and vice versa? And what shall the
programs be? What shall our effort be for the next
biennium? Personnel, staffing programs, and
facilities. Where shall they live? And you guys
make the recommendations to the chancellor's
office, and I'll take them to the board with your
strong support. However, if any single one of you,
I don't care who among you,
doesn't like the idea and doesn't accept it, you
can veto it. One person veto, in which case the
matter comes to the chancellor direct and I'll
make the decision. God, I said, but the university
president will chair this thing. Jarvis never
called a meeting.
Well, he didn't like the idea. And I told him, when I
took him a copy of it, I said, Jarvis, I'm going to
take this to the board. Between now and then, I do
not want you to lobby any single member of the
board. You stay away from them. You can make your
own presentation to the board when you're ready,
but I don't want you lobbying them beforehand. He
didn't do it, but he sent O.D.,
especially to agricultural-oriented people
like the guy up at DeKalb, the banker at DeKalb,
Texas, a forgotten little gray-headed fellow,
nice guy, great guy. And he raised questions about
the
reorganization.
I felt it was just too easy, you know, if a guy
doesn't have a research project this year, we'll
put him over here in teaching somewhere.
Teaching's got more money than it can use. We'll
put some research people on teaching money.
Incidentally, my second year in office at the
chancellor's office, you might punch this off
here. This was then in this disagreement over
organization and reporting authority was in late
79 and early 80.
I guess yes. All right. I remember coming to chat
with you to say goodbye late in June of 1980. One
morning before driving toward El Paso. And you
asked me about who the best deans were, I mean best
department heads were on the campus. And you
particularly singled out engineering and then
you asked me about Chuck Sampson. And I gave you a
very vague answer because at that point he was no
longer a department head. And then I learned two
days later that Dr. Miller, had been terminated.
Can you share any information about how that
decision came to be made? Yes.
Let me go back a ways before that.
For what purposes or what reasons I do not know.
Where are we? That the board apparently had
reached a decision that they thought a chain was in
order. Is that correct? Yes. That was clear. And
I talked to the president about it, advised him of
it.
I had a visit from O.D. Butler saying, Frank,
you've got to protect the president.